W-22066802-spike-control (#1039)
mulesoft/docs-gateway: pdk/1.8/modules/ROOT/pages/policies-pdk-configure-features-spike-control.adoc

= Using Spike Control Library Functions
ifndef::env-site,env-github[]
include::_attributes.adoc[]
endif::[]
:imagesdir: ../assets/images

[NOTE]
====
To view an example policy project that uses Flex Gateway Policy Development Kit (PDK)'s Spike Control library, see https://github.com/mulesoft/pdk-custom-policy-examples/blob/{template-policies-url-ver-var}/spike/README.md[Spike Policy Example].
====

> Spike arrest and smoothing limit how fast traffic can grow, so bursts don't overwhelm upstream services or exhaust shared capacity. With the Spike Control library, you drive a handler modeled as a token bucket with a xref:policies-pdk-configure-features-timer.adoc[Timer] and a `Clock` ticker, then you call `is_allowed` from request or response filters. Use the library for custom policies that need spike arrest, smoothing, or rate style limits like those in Flex Gateway, with Rust logic you control.

Reviewer: I'd replace this first sentence with a more straight explanation of spike control as: "Spike Control is a mechanism to regulate how quickly traffic can grow, preventing sudden surges from overwhelming upstream services or exhausting shared capacity".

> Spike control regulates how quickly traffic can grow to prevent sudden surges from overwhelming upstream services or exhausting shared capacity. With the Spike Control library, you drive a handler modeled as a token bucket with a xref:policies-pdk-configure-features-timer.adoc[Timer] and a `Clock` ticker, then you call `is_allowed` from request or response filters. Use the library for custom policies that need spike arrest, smoothing, or rate style limits like those in Flex Gateway, with Rust logic you control.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 To prevent sudden surges from overwhelming upstream services or exhausting shared capacity, spike control regulates how quickly traffic can grow. With the Spike Control library, you drive a handler modeled as a token bucket with a xref:policies-pdk-configure-features-timer.adoc[Timer] and a `Clock` ticker, then you call `is_allowed` from request or response filters. Use the library for custom policies that need spike arrest, smoothing, or rate style limits like those in Flex Gateway, with Rust logic you control.
```

[source,Rust]
----
use anyhow::Result;
use pdk::hl::*;
use std::rc::Rc;
use std::time::Duration;

use pdk::spike_control::{
    SpikeControlBuilder, SpikeControlError, SpikeControlHandler, Tier,
};

#[entrypoint]
async fn configure(
    launcher: Launcher,
    clock: Clock,
    spike_control: SpikeControlBuilder,
) -> Result<()> {
    let ticker = Rc::new(clock.period(Duration::from_millis(100)));

    let handler = Rc::new(
        spike_control
            .new("example-spike-control".to_string())
            .with_ticker(ticker)
            .with_bucket(
                "default".to_string(),
                vec![Tier {
                    requests: 1,
                    period_in_millis: 1000,
                }],
            )
            .with_retry(200, 2)
            .build()
            .map_err(|e| anyhow::anyhow!("failed to build spike control example: {e}"))?,
    );

    launcher
        .launch(on_request({
            let handler = Rc::clone(&handler);
            move |state| request_filter(state, handler.as_ref())
        }))
        .await?;
    Ok(())
}
----

> Use the fluent builder on `SpikeControlBuilder` to register a spike control name, ticker, buckets, and optional `with_retry` behavior. See the PDK Rust API documentation for every `with_*` method, what happens when you omit a call, and what `with_retry` does.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use the fluent builder on `SpikeControlBuilder` to register a spike control name, ticker, buckets, and optional `with_retry` behavior. See the PDK Rust API documentation for a list of `with_*` methods. The documentation also explains what happens when you omit a call and what  the`with_retry` method does.
```

Reviewer 2: I don't know if that edit is correct, but the sentence was a bit unclear. Same in the next comment.

[[evaluate-spike-control]]
== Evaluate Traffic with `is_allowed`

> Pass a reference to `SpikeControlHandler` into your `on_request` or `on_response` filters. For each decision, call `is_allowed` with the bucket name, a key that scopes traffic, how many permits this call consumes, and the boolean flags your design requires. See the PDK Rust API documentation for full parameter and return value details.

Reviewer 2: I think this second sentence needs to be rewritten. The items in the list aren't parallel, so it's unclear.
